---
layout: default
title: Unit A1 Java and Eclipse
---


# Java and Eclipse


* A very brief introduction to computers and programming.
* A look at the Java tools, especially the Java compiler and the Java virtual machine.
* Eclipse. Programming environment, which makes it much easier to write, build and test Java applications.
* A first simple program.
* Understand what happened behind the scenes within Eclipse
* A look at Java instructions and how to write very simple programs
* A look at how a Java application is structured in classes, methods and statements


## Scope of this Course

We have about two weeks to get you up to speed with Java. This is not enough time to cover everything. In addition to knowing most of the details, it requires also experience. But the only we to become a good programmer (in any language), is to start using the language and start learning.

Within these two weeks, we will cover Java so that you understand the main features of it. It will be much easier to learn the language, and you will have enough overview so you can also find information on your own.


## Expected 

* Use the main features in Eclipse needed for Java programming
* Write, understand and run very simple Java programs
* Know the basic tools (Java compiler, Java virtual machine, Eclipse...)


## Not Expected

* Deep knowledge of all language features
* Writing more complex programs on your own

All of this you will learn later.



# Java
Java is more than just a programming language. It is a complete technology stack to write, compile and run applications. Therefore, Java does not only consist of the language, but also tools and libraries:

* The Java **language** defines how we write Java programs. It defines the keywords and the rules for expressing programs. 
* The Java **tools** are necessary to compile and execute a Java program. They also include the Java virtual machine, which executes Java programs.
* The Java **libraries** define functionality that you can use in programs. Examples are libraries of data types like lists and sets, or libraries for networking. To write good Java programs, it is also necessary to know these libraries.

In order to "learn Java", it is not enough to only know the language. You also have to know how to use the Java tools, and which existing libraries can help you when writing programs.



## Other Sources to Learn Java

The internet, bookstores and libraries are filled with good learning material on Java. 

* The [original Java tutorials][oracle] cover all features of the language. 
* The book [Thinking in Java][tij] provides many explanations and exercises. You can [download] a free version of a previous edition.
* [Codingbat][codingbat] offers some nice coding exercises that you can directly solve on their web page.

[oracle]: http://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/
[tij]: http://www.mindview.net/Books/TIJ/
[download]: http://www.mindviewinc.com/Books/downloads.html
[codingbat]: http://codingbat.com